---
author: jcarouth
date: '2009-10-14 18:56:02'
layout: post
slug: oop-power
status: publish
title: Object Oriented Power, err, Programming
wordpress_id: '95'
comments: true
categories:
- PHP
---

I started working on integration between three libraries that were not meant
to work together. Well, I should say they were not developed with this type of
integration in mind. Naturally there were some roadblocks, but eventually I
was able to overcome them and create what should be a decently elegant
solution. But that's a post for another day. This post is targeted at
developers searching for the purpose of Object Oriented Programming.

I suppose it's not a secret that I make liberal use of the Zend Framework.
(It's nothing personal Symfony, CodeIgnitor, Django, etc., Zend Framework just
fits my style!) Part of my integration experiment led me to
[ZF-7367](http://framework.zend.com/issues/browse/ZF-7367) because I too
needed to tell the front controller to return the response rather than output
it. The first instinct is to hack up the copy of the Zend Framework to make
this work. The patch suggested in the issue gets us part of the way there, but
we also have to hack on the Zend_Application component including the Bootstrap
implementation. This would make future upgrades a pain if this feature request
is rejected, so it's obviously not the best solution.

Thinking about the problem a little deeper I immediately realized that I
already extend the Zend_Application_Bootstrap_Bootstrap (yes, the naming
scheme is quite verbose and suffers from a bit of redundant redundancy…) so it
should not be too difficult to override the run() method to do what I want.
Let's look at the original run() method inside
Zend_Application_Bootstrap_Bootstrap.

[php]/** * Run the application * * Checks to see that we have a default
controller directory. If not, an * exception is thrown. * * If so, it
registers the bootstrap with the 'bootstrap' parameter of * the front
controller, and dispatches the front controller. * * @return void * @throws
Zend_Application_Bootstrap_Exception */ public function run() { $front =
$this-&gt;getResource('FrontController'); $default =
$front-&gt;getDefaultModule(); if (null ===
$front-&gt;getControllerDirectory($default)) { throw new
Zend_Application_Bootstrap_Exception( 'No default controller directory
registered with front controller' ); }

$front->setParam('bootstrap', $this); $front->dispatch(); }[/php]

All we really need to do here is configure the front controller instance to
return the response object which is accomplished using the
Zend_Controller_Front::returnResponse(bool) method. Inside the application
bootstrap class we simply use this implementation:

[php] public function run() { $front =
$this-&gt;getResource('FrontController'); $front->returnResponse(true);

parent::run();

return $front->getResponse(); } [/php]

Now I have the response I need returned from the bootstrap file, but the
Zend_Application::run() method does not return this value. Here's where what
I've been rambling about should click. I merely have to override the
Zend_Application::run() method with one of my own, like so:

[php]class My_Application extends Zend_Application { public function run() {
return $this->getBootstrap()->run(); } }[/php]

This protects me from hassle when my copy of the Zend Framework needs updates
or upgrades but still allows for the functionality I needed. In the index.php
file I switch out all references to Zend_Application with My_Application and
everything should roll.

