---
author: jcarouth
date: '2010-11-11 10:15:24'
layout: post
slug: time
status: publish
title: 'Why I failed at blogging: time'
wordpress_id: '202'
categories:
- Authorship
tags:
- Blogging
---

This is part 3 of a series. [Read part 2](http://carouth.com/2010/11/10/if-
you-write-it-they-wont-come/) or [read part
1](http://carouth.com/2010/11/09/why-i-failed-at-blogging/).

Time. We live our lives constantly checking our watches, clocks and cell
phones to figure out how late we are for our next appointment. In the rush of
work, exercise, kids, meetings, etc. we often use the phrase, "I don't have
time to…" And **I can always say I don't have time to blog. I just don't**.

But I do. I'm lying to myself to justify not having to write what could be a
couple-sentence post on my blog.

One very simple strategy for avoiding the time excuse is to **do some pre-
writing whenever a topic hits**. Carry around a notebook if you have no other
way to get your ideas down. Writing from an outline, or even thoughts
scribbled down, is much easier than starting with a blank text editor.

I've decided to **start several drafts as a queue of posts**. As an idea for a
post hits me, I'll post it as a draft. When I think there is enough ideas in
the post, I'll turn it into coherent thoughts and complete sentences. Add a
little fact checking and de-suckification — à la
[@ElizabethN](http://twitter.com/ElizabethN) — and what do you know, I've got
a full blog post done. All total I probably spent 15–30 minutes on it. I can
spare that.

The real breakthrough for me is when I realized that **I don't have to be in
"writing mode" to make a great post**. Just flesh a post out. If it's crap,
trash it.

There's also the nugget that [@lornajane](http://twitter.com/lornajane)
mentioned in her [Day Camp for Developers](http://daycamp4developers.com)
talk. She said that one of her top posts is a two-sentence introduction, a
two-line snippet, and a single-sentence conclusion. Do you really not have
time for that?

