---
author: jcarouth
date: '2009-08-22 03:48:46'
layout: post
slug: do-you-pass-the-beer-test
status: publish
title: Do YOU Pass the Beer Test?
wordpress_id: '22'
comments: true
categories:
- Community
---

As a form of self-validation — I told you my decision was difficult, didn't I?
— I've spent some time reading some articles about how to find and hire the
perfect candidate, top reasons for leaving your job, and reinforced some
principles I've held based on conversations with other developers in the past.
One of the "gut checklist" items from an article on the [Atlassian blog](http:
//blogs.atlassian.com/rebelutionary/archives/2007/03/life_is_a_hire_way_5_tips
_for_startup_hi.html) is to decide if the new employee passes the beer test.
Simply put this is a subjective analysis that indicates whether a person would
be interesting enough to hold a conversation with outside of work.

![Beer](http://carouth.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/08/istock_beer_small.jpg)

While the original post was meant to help in the vetting process, I think it
applies equally to applicants during the job search and interview process.
Community is an aspect of the technological world that when neglected will
have a devastating effect on the work environment. Thus it is imperative that
a candidate takes time to observe the interaction among the community members
and determines what, if any, his or her role will be in the community.

I must admit, however, that I cheated on my last beer test. (The test I was
giving to the potential job, not the one I was taking.) As I mentioned, I
learned about the position from a friend and colleague of mine and he already
passed the beer test. The very fact that the team I was applying to become a
member of passed his beer test was good enough for me.

That said, I've attempted to determine what qualities I look for in a beer
test that I would give. First and foremost, I value interests that are
diversified. In a group setting I'd like to have conversations with people
that oppose my views as much as I'd like to have the proverbial choir to
preach at. Having a broad spectrum of interests leads to a healthy pool of
topics to choose from.

Along the same lines being able to articulate thoughts and opinions is among
one of the most important qualities a beer buddy, if you will, can have.
Without expression of ideas in a way that each party in the conversation can
absorb growth will be stifled. There is not a quantifiable way to distinguish
if a person can articulate thoughts in a decent manner because it is entirely
dependent upon the individual. The important factor to consider is if the
mutual articulation is well received and if your potential beer buddy or
buddies can understand what you are trying to tell them.

These two qualities are the most important, in my opinion of course, factors
that should be considered when administering a beer test.

